---
title: "Topographic modulation of fault kinematics in critical orogens"
author:
- name: Richard Styron
  affiliation: Earth Analysis, Seattle, WA

abstract: "Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian 
Mondrian Mondrian Mondrian"

---


# Introduction

In the Himalaya and Tibet, it has been known for decades that thrust 
earthquakes take place at the low-elevation rangefronts surrounding the 
plateau, while normal and strike-slip earthquakes occur only in the elevated
interior (e.g., *Molnar and Tapponnier, 1978; ..., Elliott et al., 2010*).
*Molnar and Lyon-Caen (1988)* offered an influential physical explanation for
this simultaneous low-elevation reverse faulting and high-elevation normal
faulting: Horizontal tectonic compression (integrated over the crustal column)
is essentially spatially invariant, while vertical compression at depth varies
with the height of the overlying terrain. At low elevations, horizontal
compression is greater than vertical compression, leading to crustal
thickening, while at higher elevations, vertical compression is greatest,
causing crustal extension.  

These observations and hypotheses are focused on orogens in scope and scale. 
The lower limit to which they are applicable is a natural question, but not one 
that has received much attention. The physical model of *Molnar and Lyon-Caen 
(1988)* rests on the assumption of isostatically-compensated topography, which 
is valid over $10^3$â€“$10^2$ km scales (i.e., orogens), but may not be over 10
km (mountain ranges) to 1 km (mountain) scales, where topography is supported 
elastically (**REF**). Additionally, topographic slopes at these scales may 
impart substantial shear stresses in the upper crust, which may not be a factor 
at larger scales. 

The observations used to motivate these models, primarily earthquake focal 
mechanisms and coseismic slip models, do not obviously provide assistance in 
determining the lower limit either; they are too sparse spatially and narrow 
temporally to provide adequate resolution.

However, neotectonic mapping provides an alternate description of the 
deformation field averaged over longer timescales ($10^3$-$10^5$ years) and 
offers better spatial coverage and resolution as well. Recent neotectonic maps 
(from field and remote-sensing observations) of the Himalaya and Tibet reveal a 
rich interaction between fault type and elevation on scales of 10 km, 1-2 
orders of magnitude below the typical level of application of theories of 
orogenic dynamics and elevation. These observations document changes in the 
kinematics of large fault systems where the faults cross relatively smaller 
topographic features (ridges to mountain ranges) (Figure 1); as the topographic 
relief in many cases can be demonstrated to be older than the active faults, it 
is likely that topography modifies fault kinematics at these scales as well, 
though the mechanisms may be different. Documenting this phenomenon at 10 km 
scales is the first objective of this research.

If topography is capable of modifying fault kinematics, then the total 
(tectonic plus topographic) stress field must resolve on the faults with shear 
stress directions that are consistent with the direction of fault slip. 
Therefore, if the topographic stresses can be calculated, then these stresses 
and the fault kinematics may be used to constrain the tectonic stress field. 
Precise estimation of tectonic stresses is a major advancement for 
understanding earth processes, as these stresses are of first-order importance 
in controlling earth deformation, and are largely unknown. This quantification 
is the second objective of this research.

!!!

The fault kinematics-elevation relationship is evident in fault systems spread 
widely throughout Tibet and the Himalaya (Figures 1, S1), though this work will 
focus on the southeastern Karakoram Fault and faults to its southeast, the 
Gurla Mandhata-Humla faults and the Western Nepal Fault System, where these 
relationships are particularly clear (Figure 2) and amenable to quantitative 
analysis.


# Fault type transitions on the Karakoram-Western Nepal Fault system

\begin{figure*}[t] 
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/tib_map.pdf}
\end{figure*}

The Karakoram Fault (KF) is a major dextral strike-slip fault on the boundary
between the northwestern Himalaya and southwestern Tibet (**REFS**). The KF is
dominantly strike-slip through most of its length (evident through its very
straight trace) but has a transtensional zone where it cuts through the
Gangdese Range called the Gar Basin (**something older**, *Sanchez et al.,
200x; Zhang et al., 2011*), and terminates at the Gurla Mandhata normal fault
system (dominated by the Gurla Mandhata Detachment, GMD) essentially where the
KF hits the northern Himalaya (*Murphy et al., 2002*). Some or all of the KF
slip is transferred to the GMD and south into the Himalaya along the Humla
Fault (*Murphy and Burgess, 2006*). 

Though the nature of fault connectivity remains unclear, it is possible that 
dextral slip continues through the Himalayan wedge along the Western Nepal 
Fault System (WNFS). Dextral and normal slip has been observed on the Tibrikot 
and Dogari segments of the WNFS (*Styron et al., 2011; Murphy et al., 2014; 
Silver et al., 2015*). Additional right-lateral offsets and and fault traces 
have been observed through aerial reconnaisance of the Talphi and Bari Gad 
Faults to the northwest and southeast of the Tibrikot fault (Nakata, 1989) 
though no field observations have been reported for these areas.

A striking feature of the overall geometry of the KF-GMD-WFNS faults is that 
extensional stepovers occur wherever the strike-slip faults encounter locally 
high terrain (Figure 1b). The higher terrain in all cases predates the 
strike-slip faulting along the KF-WNFS system: The Gangdese Range was uplifted 
during the [**Oligocene?**) along the Great Counter Thrust, while the Himalaya 
was uplifted in the [**Miocene**]. Additionally, faults associated with the 
current dextral-normal slip regime cut north-dipping brittle and ductile fault 
fabrics associated with the uplift of these ranges.

Given that an extensional stepover is present in each instance that the 
SKF-WNFS system encounters pre-existing high topography, it is likely that some 
mechanism needs to explain this...  blahhhhh

## Deets:
asdf

# Three-dimensional topographic and tectonic stresses

The regional-scale topography and stress relationship described here shares the 
central concept developed in the orogen-scale models, that changes in fault 
style result from variable, primarily vertical topographic stresses superposed 
on relatively invariant, primarily horizontal tectonic stresses. However, the 
regional model has some key differences, as well.

First, this problem is inherently three-dimensional. Faults of all kinematic 
types in the Himlaya and Tibet accommodate N-S shortening, E-W extension, or
both. Only the style of faulting changes. This allows us to [update] the model.
Whereas the two-dimensional model has $\sigma_V < \sigma_H$ (reverse faulting)
in the lowlands and $\sigma_V > \sigma_H$ (normal faulting) in the highlands,
the three-dimensional model has $\sigma_V$>$\sigma_{H\min}$>$\sigma_{H\max}$ in
the lowlands, $\sigma_{H\min}$>$\sigma_V$>$\sigma_{H\max}$ (strike-slip
faulting) in areas of moderate elevations, and $\sigma_{H\min}$>
$\sigma_{H\max}$>$\sigma_V$ in the highlands. While adding another dimension to
the model is not a great theoretical breakthrough, it is very enabling for
estimating tectonic stresses, because it lets us explicitly treat the
two-dimensional assumption that the $\sigma_{H\min}$ is perpendicular to the
cross-section. This is not necessarily true in cases of parallel normal and
reverse faulting, as in the Andes (*Dalmayrac and Molnar, 1981*) and Albania
(*Copley et al., 2009*): in these orogens, it is possible (though unlikely)
that $\sigma_{H\max}$ is orthogonal to the strike of pre-existing weak faults
accommodating the deformation, and the elevation-fault type relationship is
based on the relative magnitudes of $\sigma_{H\min}$ and $\sigma_V$. In the
three-dimensional case, this assumption is not made and all principal stresses
are accounted for. Futhermore, if $\sigma_{H\min}$ and $\sigma_{H\max}$ are not
near equal, there may be a large elevation gap between reverse and normal
faulting, leading to large uncertainties in stress estimations. By considering
all three fault styles and principal stresses, the uncertainties are much
reduced.

The second major difference is that shorter-wavelength topography is supported 
elastically rather than isostatically. This means that topographic stresses may 
vary dramatically over short horizontal and vertical distances, the effects of 
topographic slopes are non-negligible (as these may impart locally strong 
horizontal stress, especially at shallow depths near the toes of slopes), and 
the perturbation to the stress field produced by topography extends 
horizontally outward at depth rather than simply being a simply vertical sum of 
the overlying gravitational force. As a result, short-wavelength topographic 
stresses may be spatially variable and could resolve very differently along 
strike and down-dip on a through-going fault.



## Topographic stress

To test the hypothesis that the topography-fault kinematics relationship is 
based on a varying topographic stress superposed on a laterally-invariant 
tectonic stress field, I seek to reproduce the observed fault kinematics by 
calculating the topographic and tectonic stress fields, and resolving them on 
3D fault models in the region. The topographic stress calculations are 
deterministic, as there is little uncertainty in the topography and allowable 
variation in the Earth's elastic parameters does not meaningfully modify the 
results. The tectonic stresses are solved for using a Bayesian inversion 
scheme. To avoid overfitting and assess the veracity of results beyond the 
study region, the inversion is performed on two relatively well-studied faults, 
the Gurla Mandhata and Tibrikot-Dogari faults, and then applied to additional
deformation data in the region: a coseismic slip model from the 2015 $M_w$ 7.8
Gorkha, Nepal earthquake (*Galetzka et al., 2015*) and pre-Gorkha focal
mechanisms throughout the region. The two faults modeled here were selected
because the fault geometry and kinematics are well known through field (*Murphy
et al., 2002; Murphy et al., 2004; Murphy et al., 2014*) and
thermochronological (*McCallister et al., 2014*) studies; the other faults in
the WNFS have not received sufficient study to model confidently.

The topographic stresses are calculated through elastic halfspace methods 
following *Liu and Zoback (1992)* and *Styron and Hetland (2015)*. These 
methods involve the convolution of vertical and horizontal loading functions 
created from topographic data with Green's functions describing the propagation 
of stresses in the halfspace from vertical and horizontal point load on the
surface. The vertical load calculations are the fundamental results, while the
horizontal load calculations correct for stresses induced by slopes and the
coupling between the halfspace and the topography above. For more detailed
methods, see the Supplementary Materials. This results in a 3D array with the
3x3 topographic stress tensor calculated at every point (500 m horizontal
resolution, 1 km vertical resolution) in a ~840x700 km region. The halfspace
surface is set to sea level.

The Gurla Mandhata and Tibrikot-Dogari fault traces are extended to depth based
on contraints from structural data and thermal modeling. The fault surfaces are
made into a triangular mesh, and the stress tensors are then interpolated onto
them using barycentric interpolation from the three vertices and centroid of
each triangular fault patch. The rake of the maximum shear stress on each fault
patch is calculated based on the strike and dip of that fault patch. 

## Tectonic stress

I then solve for the allowable tectonic stresses through a Bayesian inversion, 
seeking to minimize the misfit between the rake of the resolved total stress
tensor (topographic plus tectonic) and the observed slip rake. The tectonic
stress field $T$ is assumed to increase linearly with depth below the halfspace
surface (*Townend and Zoback, 2004*), and so is scaled to be a fraction of
lithostatic pressure below the halfspace surface (i.e., $\rho g z$, where
$\rho$ = 2700 kg m$^{-3}$). $T$ is horizontal, and has three components:
$T_{\max}$, $T_{\min}$ and $T_{az}$ (the azimuth of $T_{\max}$.) $T_{\max}$ has
a uniform prior from [0â€”1) $\rho g z$, $T_{\min}$ has a uniform prior of [-1â€”1)
$T_{\max}$ ($T_{\min}$ is by definition smaller than $T_{\max}$ and therefore
cannot be independently defined in terms of $\rho g z$), and $T_{az}$ has a
uniform prior from 0Â°â€”359Â°. Each sample of $T$ is then rotated to $T_{N-S}$,
$T_{E-W}$, and $T_{N-E}$ (the horizontal shear stress) and added to the
topographic stress tensor at each point.

For each of 1 million samples, the mean rake misfit $\bar{\lambda^m}$ is
calculated as the mean of the absolute value of the rake differences between
the observed slip rake and modeled maximum shear stress rake. Then, the
relative likelihood of each sample set is calculated as

$$ p(D|T) = \frac{\exp(\kappa \cos \bar{\lambda^m})}{\exp(\kappa \cos
\bar{\lambda^m_{\max}})} $$

The posteriors $p(T|D)$ are then sampled proportionally to the relative
likelihood, following Bayes' rule $p(T|D) \propto p(T) \, p(D|T)$.

### Results

The resutls of the tectonic stress inversion are shown in Figure 3. The modal
$T_{az}$ is ~20Â°, parallel to the direction of the Indo-Asian convergence
(**REF**). $T_{\max}$ has a mode at < 0.05 $\rho g z$ (~1.3 MPa km$-1$ depth),
and $T_{\min}$ has a mode near 0, with a left (tensile) skew. The maximum
likelihood values for the joint posterior distribution (i.e., the location of
the highest posterior probability density in the 3-variable space) is fairly
similar to the highest-density point of the 1-D marginal distribution for each
variable: $T_{\max} = 0.1 \rho g z$, $T_{\min} = -0.1 \rho g z$, and $T_{az} =
20Â°$.  

These results agree well with regional earthquake data not used in the
inversion: The maximum-likelihood tectonic stresses were scaled to depth and
added to the topographic stress tensor at each point in a coseismic slip model
from the 2015 Gorkha, Nepal earthquake (*Galetzka et al., 2015*) and pre-Gorkha
focal mechanisms from the central Himalaya and southern Tibet (*ISC catalog*).
The total stress tensors were resolved on each fault plane ([chosen
andersonianly/randomly] for the focal mechanisms) and the predicted shear
stress rake was compared to the observed slip rake. The rakes matched very well
(<30Â° misfit) for nearly all data points, regardless of whether the data were
from thrust, normal or strike-slip earthquakes (Figure S1). This confirms the
predictive power of this simple model where spatially-varying topographic
stress coupled with depth-scaled tectonic stress control a complicated
deformation field.

# Discussion

This study 




(almost all active mountain belts show this pattern: Alps, Andes, Cascades, 
...).


# References
